 I'm Paolo Zurico and I'm Professor of Economics at London Business School. Together with my colleague and regularity, we have put together a series of mini-lecture as a user guide to COVID-19. Today, I'm going to present part one about GALPAR in the fact. Let me describe what we're going to do and what we're going to learn from this lecture. We're going to present some basic evidence on the pandemic, and we're going to identify some pattern in the data from existing research available out there that might have been overlooked. We're going to discuss what drives the capacity of a country-at-system. After this lecture, we'll be able to understand the demographic composition of career and critical patients. You will be able to use contrast-country comparisons to be able to evaluate pros and cons that the different health policies strategies that has been adopted by different countries around the world. Also, you will be able to measure and to identify a country-at-system capacity and which kind of policy can expand it. Let me start by briefly summarizing the evidence that by now is sadly not. On this chart, you find, as a vertical axis, the number of infected cases as a function of the number of days that have passed since case number 100 was declared. Always being country has been normalized to zero so that you can make a comparison across country. There is something that is very clear from this curve. Count that the number of cases tend to exponential increase and to all countries sooner or later they tend to catch up with China. There are, however, some notable exceptions. South Korea, Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong. Why does country are different? Why, after the same number of days, data and to have developed much less infected cases than the other country? Can we learn anything from their health policy strategy? For example, South Korea have used a huge testing program. Japan, there are strong social norms and very large obedience of the people to the government in the country. In Singapore and Hong Kong, suppression policy in particular is a quarantine has been extensive practice. Another way of looking at the evidence is rather than looking at the empirical contagion curve to look at the empirical mortality curve. On the vertical axis of this chart, you can see the number of deaths as a function of the number of days since that number declared. Again, we can see a clear curve with countries catching up and in the case of Italy, actually overtaken China. Again, South Korea is an outlier. After the same number of days since death number 10 was declared, South Korea has a fraction of the number of deaths in Italy. Why? What can we learn from the experience of the other country? Let me start by looking at the infected. In this chart, you see for each age group of the population, what is the share of infected in that age group? South Korea is the right bar, whereas Italy is represented by the green bar. A stark difference emerged from this comparison. If you look at the Korean data, it will look like that most of the infected are young. In fact, in the people in their 20s, you have as much as 30% of the infected, but people in their 70s and the 80s are only 6 or 3%. On the other hand, Italy has very few people that are infected among the young and among the old, the share gets as large as 20% among people in their 60s, in their 70s and in the race. Why? Which data shall we trust? Together, some information about this is very useful to look at the different health policy strategy adopted by the two countries. South Korea is essentially testing everyone, not literally, but using a statistical procedure which is called testing a random, using a representative sample of the population, which has been tested and therefore we can be sure that they are sampled evenly for different age groups. Italy on the other hand has chosen a policy in which they only taught tested this symptomatic and typically the worst and critical one that they were going to hospital. So the sample of Italy is usually biased toward the people that actually develop symptoms. But looking at South Korea is suggest that in fact, there are much more asymptomatic than symptomatic, which suggests that the number of infected cases is probably much larger than we know. Of course, you might think that South Korea, especially, something that scientists call external validity. However, there's something that we can learn from other countries, then something that we can learn from other experience. This is what scientists call a case-in-natural experiment, which happened in the city of Vaux in Vellato. In that city, a large share of the population contracted lives. True, Italy had a policy that only infected people should be tested, but it happened that in the city of Vaux, most of the population get infected. So the city of Vaux is a representative sample of the population in the city of Vaux, simply because the majority of people got infected. And within the sample of the city of Vaux is very clear that the majority of infected are among the young. So now we can be more confident and state that COVID-19, in fact, the young, much more than it does with the old, is that the young are much more likely to be asymptomatic. It's the true, however, that COVID-19 make much more death about among the older. What you see in this chart by age group is the so-called fatality rate, which is the ratio between the number of deaths and the number of cases. Bear in mind that there is large uncertainty about this ratio. We can only be sure about the number of deaths, but the number of cases is unknown, because in most part of the world with the exception of South Korea, only symptomatic cases can test it. This implies that the number of cases in everywhere else but South Korea is much larger than actually what recorded by the government. In fact, South Korea has a fatality rate, which is below 1%, China's 3%, Italy's surprising and not very credible 7%, which is probably an artifact of the fact that in Italy only symptomatic has been tested so far. The number is probably much closer. The actual number is more likely to be closer to South Korea and China, suggesting that in Italy, unfortunately there are many more infected cases that the Italian government believe. Something, however, that is quite consistent across country is that the share of people that die tends to be in the older group. So it must be true that older, that COVID-19 tends to kill more the older. Still, there seems to be a dramatic differences between the share of the old among Italy, relative to the Chinese and the people from South Korea. To appreciate whether this difference is true or is a statistical artifact, we can look at another piece of evidence, the demographic pyramid. This compute is measure, the share of population in each age group among the male and among the female. For example, if you are a Chinese male and you have between 13 and 34 years old, you will be represented 4.6% of the total Chinese population. And if you are a female in the same age group, you will be represented 4.3 of the Chinese population. What is clear by comparing the pyramid of China with the one of Italy is that China has a much factor part down here. This implies that there are many more young as a share of relation than the Iranian Italy. In fact, for virtually each of these groups, once you put together the male of the female, you arrive to 2% more of the share of population in the same age group in China than it is in Italy. Of course, if a bottom part is larger, it tends to be the case than the top part is thinner. If you compare, for example, people in their 70 and you some female and male, what you get is that you have a share of population that is more than 2% larger than the same share of population for China. In other words, Italy has a far larger share of the population among the old than China is. But we have said in the previous slide that COVID-19 kills more older people than young, but if Italy has a larger share of the population among the old, this must imply that the fatality rate must be higher for Italy than for China, and that's exactly what we observe. Why do we give so much importance to a number of cases? This is the contagion curve that everybody talks about and that by now you will be probably familiar with. The red curve represents the number of cases of infected cases as a function of the time since the first case is developed. Without any policy intervention, what's happening is that the curve is flat, but then as if the first people infect them, this tend to infect another person, another there are two people that can infect other two people, and now those four people can go at infect other four people, and this multiply in a way that makes the curve growing exponentially. But while the curve grows exponentially, it arrives a point in which many people have got infected, and if they won't recover, they also get immunity. This means that the new infected cannot affect everybody else because people have already got immunity, and therefore we go down the contagion curve. The problem is that the healthcare system has a capacity, which is represented here as the horizontal gray line. Whenever we are above the health system capacity, it means that there are more critical patients than intensive care unit beds available. This is a large fraction of those people might die as a result of a lack of intensive care unit. Being an economist, we are used to think about as a supplier demand. You can think of the red contagion curve as the demand for healthcare, and you can think about the horizontal line, the gray line as the supply for healthcare. What is the problem with red curve? The cases of infected are so concentrated in a short period of time that is exceed by far the capacity of the health system. So what the government is trying to do is try to slow down the spread of the disease in a way that the number of cases can spread out. The area under the blue curve is not necessarily smaller and is not even possibly desirable that it is smaller than the red curve. However, the cases are spread over time in a way that the healthcare system can cope and demand and supply can mean. Whereas without any intervention, there is an excess demand that the government needs to find a way to resolve. The big question is how to achieve this more effectively. There is a consensus about the desirability of flattening the curve. There is less consensus of how to achieve that. A first step to understanding what the government could do is to look at how much it can expand the intensive care capacity. In the next video, part two, epidemiology for donors, we are going to talk about how to slow down the speed of contagion. Let's start from the expansion of capacity. First of all, let's appreciate how we can identify a measure with these and health system capacity in each country. In this chart, you see for many university countries what is the number of critical beds for every 100,000 people. Germany has 29 beds for every 100,000 cities. Portugal has only four. Italy is about the average with a number close to 12.5. When we talk about how to system capacity, we don't talk just the number of beds, but also the number of equipment, with for COVID-19, is mostly about ventilators. Being a disease that brings respiratory complication. So should not come as a surprise that in an effort to expand capacity of ventilator, Italy has asked his only manufacturer to quadruple the supply of ventilator. Germany has ordered 10,000 more and Matt Hancock UK Health Secretary have stated, if you produce a ventilator, we will buy. No number is to our. There is also geographical heterogeneity in the health system capacity. In this chart, we reported the share of intensive care unit used for COVID-19 patient. Just to give you an understanding of how intensive care unit work, typically, or at each point in time during the year, 70% of those beds are occupied with people with other diseases. Car accident, stroke, critical care due to the normal seasonal influenza is only 30% of bed on average, which are actually free, which are actually spare to be used for other emergencies. This is what you see in this chart as the horizontal drain line. As you can see, in terms just as COVID-19 patient is concerned, lumberjacket is already well above its capacity. People must be sitting in rooms in corridor of simply must have been turned away from the hospital. And the situation doesn't look any better in market, remote, about the host of the Guri. It's all in the south which still seems to have spare capacity. Overall, as a country, Italy seems to be already pretty much stretched. There is however some good news. In the short run, health supply, healthcare supply can be expanded. This is the case of lumberjacket between the 25th of February and the 16th of March. The number of coronavirus cases increased, but we did the share of patients that were served for colonizers increased. And in particular, the region of lumberjacket was able to expand going from number as low as 700 on the beginning of the sample. And in a matter of a few days, minus to arrive. So from the 5th of March to the 16th of March, in 10 days, men has to move from 700 places to 1200 places and increase of 500 intensive care unit. So what the government can do can start to use beds which are in the private sector, in the private health sector and pay the private health sector to expand this capacity. Can start using hotels, can start using barracks, can start using even school and classroom as intensive care unit. But you don't need only beds, you also need ventilators. So you need to turn to your manufacturing industry and asking to produce more ventilator and to any manufacturer in firm to turn and convert themselves into producing components that together can be assembly to new KSI ventilator. However, is not just a matter of physical capital. Expanding capacity also means expanding human capital capacity. There will not be enough nurses, there will be nothing of doctors. So one option that the government has is to recall all nurses and doctors which are retired. You may even go farther and trying to start into train for very basic task associated with the ventilator, police officers and school teachers. And ask the army to come in and to carry out the duty of police officer. Not only, but if the cases are originally concentrated like the case of Lombardy, a good idea is to bring non-disease related critical care, critical patient in other regions which still has spare capacity to release a little bit of pressure on the region in the facility. So what we have learned in this part one is that covenantine is the worth of health crisis of our time. Young are much more likely to be infected. They are the carrier and they are typically symptomatic. But old are more likely to die. Many countries facing strong excess demand for healthcare. There are too many critical patients, not just about covenantine, for too few beds and ventilator in intensive care unit. This pose a challenge of the threat, not only to infected patients, but also to regular critical patients for any other reason which are now much more likely to die or waiting longer time for the critical attention that they need. Expanding a healthcare supply requires time in hotel, but acts impossible school into intensive care unit, but also asking to the manufacturing industry to turn into maker of ventilators component. Still, it's not enough to expand capacity of physical capital, you also need to expand human capital capacity. Recall the retired nurse at personnel, train police officer volunteer, where the atmosphere is carried out, policy duty. This is as much as it means for this part one on gathered in the facts. The next part is about epidemiology for donors. Thank you very much.