what do most people not understand about the process of making a pop song now? i think everybody's got this allure of of music. it really is pop music is moving into pop culture. it's crossing over. people are seeing behind the scenes instagram stories, relationships, tabloid journalism, whether it's from tik tok or, you know, citizen journalists or youtube channels doing reactions. but i think that the process of getting to the stage of this song is now live seems to have changed quite a lot. so what is it that people don't necessarily get about what that process looks like now? so i just made this video where i was talking about the people that are behind the scenes that help write the songs and in many cases write the songs and people have the impression that because somebody sings a song that they are the writer on it or if they have co-writers that the co-writers are are a minor part of this, right? but the but in reality, most pop songwriters, not all, but most, have very little to do with their songs other than choosing them. they might come in and say, "okay, i have an idea for a story of a song." they'll describe it and then these professional songwriters will help them realize that idea or the people might have the song completely done and they come in. hard to generalize, but does taylor swift write her write all of her lyrics? he probably writes most of her lyrics, i would think. but um but typically um it used to be that when when you in the 1980s, rock bands, there would there were very few people that were songwriters that worked with artists. desmond child was one. and he worked with bon joy, worked with kiss and he would coowrite. he was a specialist that would write with rock bands, but it was very rare. rock bands wrote their own songs. and a lot of pop artists wrote their own songs, but you know, madonna always had co-writers. this has been a thing since the 1950s. people have had songwriters. they've had co-writers. the thing now about pop music is that you have to be your own promotion department. basically to be really successful. so, you have to be you kind of have to be an expert in social media. and i see people that um um one of the people is tate mccrae is a huge pop star and she started on youtube. she knows how to make her own videos for and she'll make 20 30 tik toks for a song for a single. you can't beat that for advertising. and and people that have that advantage, they can just put up their phone and they can lip-s sync, they do a dance, they can cut the stuff themselves on their phone and upload it. and you're a big pop star. if you can do that, that's a tremendous advantage. and it this is how songs become hits because if you don't have a viral moment with a song that's you know the the days of the record labels creating your career are pretty much over. yes, they can help but um but it's very difficult if you don't have something that's on tiktok blowing up to uh to have a successful single. is there a problem with so many songwriters contributing to the end product? is there an issue with that? i i get the sense that maybe some people when the veil gets revealed and they understand how the sausage is made go hang on 15 people wrote this coalplay song, it's vocals and the guitar and program drums. how? why? what were the there's chris martin, then there's the other one. i think there's two more. who the who are these 11 people in the room with them? well, i always wonder that, too. like, who are these people? cold play, the first to me, the first two cold play records are great records. really, the second record to me is an absolutely brilliant record. um, as people get older, i've made videos about this that uh that once people hit 30 or so artists mhm. they begin to um lose the spark, if you will. the beatles broke up the year that lenin and uh ringo turned 30. otherwise, paul mccartney was 28 when they broke up. george harrison was 27. these guys were young guys. they did 12 albums over the course of eight years. uh, some of the most important songs ever written. and they were they weren't even 30. they literally broke up. lennon turned 30 on november 9th, 1970. they were already broken up by then. how much do you think that's due to the fact that they were 30 and how much of that do you think is due to the fact that they released 12 albums in the space of 8 years? because it seems to me that the pace of release, i know you've talked about this, is now slower. y that people are producing an album every 18 months, something like that. maybe if you're cranking, right? and then to run it once, twice, come back, run it, run it again. um, well, that would, you know, extend that you're talking about a 20 year career off the back of the same pacing. so, how much of it do you think is, i don't know, some sort of wall that creatives hit at 30 and how much of it is i've just exhausted my my juice? i think i think it's both those things. so, one of the things if you think about writing songs is like working out, right? so, the beatles in 1965, they released the the record rubber soul on august 6th, 1965. then on december 3rd, they released or they released help, i'm sorry. and then they released rubber soul on december 3rd, and they released revolver on august 5th. so, in 364 days, they released three 14 song albums. so, they wrote, recorded, and released. yeah. and they toured three records in one calendar year. that's insane. but and and they had so many hit songs on it. but that's like working out, you know? it's the more you work out. whereas nowadays, if you go most bands now, they do a record, they go out and tour for 18 months, they tour for two years, whatever, then then it's you're kind of out of shape writing because when you're on the road, most people don't like to write on the road. so what do you have to do? you come back, you put down a bunch of ideas and h those aren't very good. that's the the starting to get back in shape again. you know, it takes a couple weeks to how did the beatles do it? the beatles were just they well, first of all, they were so famous that they couldn't do anything else. they were stuck in hotel rooms a lot, i guess. um, and they had incredible competition between linen mccartney and george harrison to to to write better and better songs. plus, they were competitive with bands like the beach boys as well. but, um, that beatles are kind of a unique yeah, i it's it's like i don't know, talking about usain bolt's ability to run fast or something. uh, so just explain how would you identify or categorize the difference between a producer driven song and an artist driven song? is is there such a thing or does it just is it just meritocracy and whatever sounds best at the end of the day is is what matters. producerdriven songs are songs like um would be something like since you've been gone by kelly clarkson. that was max martin and dr. luke wrote this song. they recorded they wrote the song. they wrote the lyrics. they recorded everything. she came in and sang it. and that's a producer driven song. uh literally written by the two guys that produced it, including the lyrics. so, um most music nowadays or a lot of music is producer driven, whereas um people come up with a track, whether it's country music, whether it's uh pop music, even rock music, there's some bed track first. now to be fair, historically almost every songwriter writes the music first. they sing a melody and then they write lyrics to the melody. elton john being the exception. bernie toppen was elton's lyricist. they co-wrote the stuff. bernie would finish the lyrics, give them to elton. elton would sit at the piano, improvise the song, sing it, re record it on a half inch or on a dat, and then uh and then they would cut the song. he would basically improvise it to the lyrics he had. i mean, this is very rare. i think in the beatles catalog, from what i know, there was one song across the universe where john lennon had the lyrics first. so so i mean, it's like the juice world of the pop yeah. era. yeah. so this is this is when when i went to nashville to do some songwriting, i told you i had a a i had one number one song, the only country song i ever wrote. but then i i went to nashville and i they if you have a number one song they put you in with all the a-list songwriters. so i went there and i uh in for probably three months in 2014 and i wrote with all the top songwriters in nashville. so the first session i went in and it was always three people and i was like why is it three people? well that's the way that we do it here. and i was like why? well because we want to involve you know at the time as many publishing companies as possible different publishing companies. so i was signed to sony atv. there was a guy from there would be a writer from warner chapel or maybe two writers from warner chapel. and you get in a room. i was a track guy. so i came in with my laptop and i would have five tracks that i programmed drums. i played guitar. i played banjo. i played whatever on and i had a full track. what do you think of this? oh, that's interesting. um, what else you got? play the next song. oh, i like that. i think i might have a chorus line. everybody opens their lap laptops. what do you think of this? and then they're looking through typing through. oh, i got this line from someone else. and then they would have to be included in on the songwriting too or whatever. so that would be uh that was in nashville and but at that time period that's when track guys started. the track guys are basically the producers that would come in and and um uh that would be a producer driven song. and almost everything you hear on country radio now is producer trevet. in other news, this episode is brought to you by momentous. if your workouts feel flat, your recovery is slow, or you've just been feeling off, it might not be your training plan or diet might be something a bit more boring like your testosterone. so, if you're not performing in the gym or the bedroom the way that you want, or you just want to naturally improve your testosterone, tonatali is a fantastic researchback place to start. and when this is stacked with zinc, it can make a huge improvement in testosterone production, strength, recovery, and energy. which is why i'm such a huge fan of momentous's zinc. it supports testosterone, boosts vitality, and helps keep everything running like it should. and if you're still unsure, momentus offers a 30-day money back guarantee, so you can buy it and try it for 29 days. if you don't love it, they'll give you your money back. plus, they ship internationally. right now, you can get 35% off your first subscription and that 30-day money back guarantee by going to the link in the description below or heading to live momentous.com/modern wisdom and using the code modernwisdom at checkout. that's live nu wisdom and modern wisdom a checkout. thank you very much for tuning in. did you enjoy that clip with the one and only rick bata? well, full length episode is available right here.