What is it that most people don't understand about the process of making a pop song now?. It's really that pop music is moving towards pop culture.. He's crossing.. People are watching behind the scenes, Instagram stories, relationships, tabloids, journalism, either from TikTok or you know, setsters and journalists or YouTube channels making reactions.. But I think the process of getting to the stage of this song is now live seems to have changed quite a bit.. So what is it that people don't necessarily get about what that process is like now? So I just made this video where I was talking about the people behind the scenes that help write the songs.. And in many cases write the songs. And people have the impression that because someone sings a song that is the writer in it. Or if they have co-writers, that co-writers are a minor part of this.. But actually, most pop composers, not all, but most have very little to do with their songs other than choosing them.. You could come in and say, okay, I have an idea for a story about a song.. They'll describe it.. And then these professional composers will help you realize that idea.. Or people can have the song completely done and come in difficult to generalize. But Taylor Swift writes all his lyrics? He probably writes most of his lyrics, I think. But usually, it used to be that when you guys in the '80s rock bands, there were very few people who were composers who worked with artists.. Desmond Child was one.. He worked with Bon Jovi, worked with Kiss, and co-wrote. He was a specialist who would write with rock bands.. But it was so weird.. Rock bands composed their own songs. And many pop artists wrote their own songs. But Madonna always had co-writers.. This has been one thing since the 1950s people have had composers.. They've had co-writers.. What happens now with pop music is that you have to be your own promotion department, basically, to succeed.. So you have to be, you can't be a social media expert.. And I see people that one of the people is Tate McCrae is a big pop star and she started on YouTube.. She knows how to make her own videos.. And she'll make 20, 30 TikToks for a song for a single. You can't beat that for publicity.. And people who have that advantage, they can only put their phone on, they can synchronize their lips, they do a dance, they can cut things themselves on their phone and upload it.. And you're a big pop star.. If you can do that, it's a tremendous advantage.. And that's how songs become hits.. Because if you don't have a viral moment with a song, those are the days when the record labels that create your career are over.. Yes, they can help, but it's very difficult if you don't have something that's in TikTok exploding to have a successful single.. Is there a problem with so many composers contributing to the final product? Is there a problem with that? I have a feeling that maybe some people when the veil is revealed and understand that sausages made go, wait, 15 people wrote this cold game song. It's the voice and guitar and drums of the program.. Why, what did it fit in?. Then there's the other one.. I think there's two more.. Who the fuck, who are these 11 people in the room with them?. Coldplay, the first one, for me, the first two albums are big albums.. Actually, the second album for me is an absolutely brilliant album.. As people get older, I've made videos about this that once people reach 30 or more artists, they start to lose the spark, if you want. The Beatles broke the year Lenin and Ringo turned 30.. Otherwise, Paul McCartney was 28 when they split up, George Harrison was 27. These guys were young.. They made 12 albums over eight years.. Some of the most important songs ever written and not even 30. They literally broke up.. Lenin turned 30 on November 9, 1970 or had already broken by then. How much do you think it is because of the fact that they were 30 years old and how much of that do you think it is because of the fact that they released 12 albums in the eight-year space? Because it seems to me that the release rate, I know you talked about this, is now slower, that people are producing an album every 18 months, something like that.. Maybe if you get going and then two on it, once, twice run back again.. That would extend, you're talking about 20 years of career behind the same beat.. How much do you think it is, I don't know, some kind of wall that the creatives hit at 30 and how much it is, I just exhausted my juice.. I think both. One of the things, if you think about writing songs is like exercising.. The Beatles in 1965 released the album, Rubber Soul, on August 6, 1965.. Then, on December 3, they released help, I'm sorry, and then released Rubber Soul on December 3, and released Revolver on August 5.. In 364 days, they released three albums of 14 songs. They wrote, recorded and published, and toured three albums in one calendar year.. That's crazy.. And they had so many successful songs on it, but that's like exercising.. It's the more you exercise, or it's today, if you go to most bands now, make a record, go on tour for 18 months, tour for two years, whatever, then you're out of shape writing. Because when you're on the way, most people don't like to write on the way.. What do you have to do? You come back, you put a lot of ideas, and those aren't very good.. That's the beginning to get back in shape again.. It takes a couple of weeks to.... How did the Beatles do it?. Well, first of all, they were so famous they couldn't do anything else.. They were stuck in hotel rooms a lot, I guess.. And they had an incredible competition between Lenin McCartney, Andrew Harrison, to write better and better songs.. In addition, they were competitive with bands like The Beach Boys.. But the Beatles are kind of singular.. Yeah.. I didn't know that talking about Usain Bolt's ability to run fast, something. So just explain, how would you identify a categorization of the difference between a song driven by the producer and a song driven by the artist? Is there such a thing? Or is it just meritocracy and the best part of the song at the end of the day is what matters? The songs driven by the producer are songs like.. It would be like, since you left for Kelly Clarkson, it was Max Martin and Dr.. Luke wrote this song.. They wrote the song, they wrote the lyrics, they recorded everything.. He came and sang it, and that's a producer-driven song.. Literally written by the two guys who produced it, including the lyrics. So most of the music today, or a lot of music, is driven by the producer.. While people come up with a song, whether it's country music, whether it's pop music, even rock music, there's some bed court first.. Now, to be fair, historically, almost all composers write music first.. They sing a melody, and then they write lyrics to the melody.. Elton John is the exception. Bernie Copp was Elton's lyricist.. They co-wrote the material.. Bernie finished the lyrics, gave him the Elton, Elton sat on the piano, improvised the song, sang it, recorded it at half an inch or on a data, and then cut the song.. I basically improvised it with the lyrics I had.. I mean, this is really weird.. I think in the Beatles catalog, as far as I know, there was a song in the whole universe where John Lennon had the lyrics first.. It's like the world of pop-age juices.. Yeah, so this is.... When I went to Nashville to write a song, I told you I had a number one song.. The only country song I've ever written. But then I went to Nashville, and if you have a number one song, they put you with all the composers on list A.. So I went there, and I, in the first probably three months in 2014, and I wrote with all the best composers in Nashville. So the first session I went into, and it was always three people, and I was like, why are three people?. Well, because we want to involve, you know, at that time, as many publishing companies as possible, different publishing companies.. So I signed Sony ATV.. There was a kind of... There would be a Warner Chappell writer, and maybe two Warner Chappell writers, and you get into a room.. I was a track guy.. So I walked in with my laptop, and I'd have five tracks that I programmed battery.. I played the guitar.. I played banjo.. I touched anything, and I had a complete lead.. How about this?. What else you got?. Oh, I like that.. I think I might have a chorus line.. Everybody opens their laptops.. And then they're looking through, writing through. Oh, I have this line from someone else, and then they would have to be included in the composition as well, whatever it is.. So that would be.... That was Nashville.. But in that period of time, that's when the guys on the track started. The guys on the track are basically the producers that would come, and that would be a producer-driven song.. And almost everything you hear on country radio is now driven by the producer. In other news, this episode is brought to you by Momentous. If your workouts feel flat, slow recovery, or just feel bad, it might not be a workout plan or diet, it might be a little more boring, like your testosterone.. So if you're not acting in the gym, or in the bedroom, the way you want, or you just want to improve your testosterone naturally, Tonkata Lee is a fantastic research place to start.. And when this is stacked with zinc, it can make a great improvement in testosterone production, strength, recovery and energy, so I'm a big fan of Momentous zinc.. Supports testosterone, increases vitality, and helps keep everything running as it should. And if you're not sure yet, Momentous offers a 30-day money back guarantee. So you can buy it and try it for 29 days.. If you don't like it, don't give your money back.. In addition, they are sent internationally.. At this time, you can get 35% of your first subscription and that 30-day money back guarantee by going to the link in the description below, or by going to livemomentous.com-modern-wisdom, using the modern-wisdom code. Look, that's L-I-V-E-M-O-M-E-N-T-U-S.. E-N-T-U-U-L-I-V-E-M-O-M-E-N-T-O-U-S.com-ash-modern-wiss. And modern wisdom. Take a look.. Thank you so much for tuning in.. Did you like that clip with the only Rick B?. Well, fun like that episode is available right here.. Come on, give him a watch.