Hi, I'm Hannah Gelbart here and welcome back to another episode of What in the World Service BBC. Now, seeing that the northern aurora used to be in something unique in life, the night sky lights up in pink and green and, of course, everyone rushes to capture it on their phones.. And did you know that there are also Southern Lights? So today we want to find out what causes these beautiful colors, why people are seeing them more often and you’re going to get advice from a photographer on how to capture them better.. Here with me in the studio to talk about this is Caroline Steele, a BBC Science presenter. Hey, thanks for inviting me.. Have you ever seen the Northern Lights? I wish I could say yes and I feel I should be able to say yes because I’m such a fan, but no, I haven’t.. I've tried so many times.. So a couple of times this year I've driven to a field outside London and stayed in the dark, looking at the sky really excited because I have friends texting saying they can see them as south as Brighton. But I haven't made it yet.. I also stood on my tiptoe balcony.. I really shouldn't say that because the balcony is pretty dangerous.. But I've stood on the balcony on my tips looking out to see if I can take a look at them and it's always been a little rainy and cloudy where I am.. But I've seen a lot of pictures of them.. For people who don't know what they look like, can you describe what you might be seeing if you see them in the naked eye?. So if you imagine a picture, you imagine that most people have seen a picture of the Northern Lights, you have tapes of light across the sky.. It can be green, it can be purple, it can be blue. And that's taken using a camera.. It may seem slightly different to the naked eye, not that I know first hand, but apparently they're a little less bright because when you take a picture you basically leave the camera lens open for a little longer to capture a little more light. But they also move and blink, which is something you can only really see in person and do not capture very well in the camera. So yes, they sound amazing.. I could tell you the science where they came from.. Gold, yes.. That's all.. Well, then they start, they actually start with the sun.. So the sun is constantly emitting charge particles.. It's like sending something we call the solar wind to Earth.. So the Earth is being bombarded constantly, kind of rain by these charge particles.. Luckily, Earth has a magnetic field.. And it looks like if you imagine the Earth, it's like the Earth has two ears, that's the magnetic field.. And the magnetic field protects the Earth from these charge particles.. So normally, we don't realize that we're being rained by the sun.. But sometimes these things happen called coronal mass ejections, which is where there's essentially some kind of explosion on the surface of the sun.. And send a ton of cargo particles to Earth.. And the magnetic field gets a little overwhelmed and some charge particles can enter the north and south pole.. And when these charge particles collide with atoms in our atmosphere, it emits light. And that's why we see these tapes of light in the sky.. What causes the different colors? Ah, so it depends on what kind of atom the charge particle is colliding with. So if it hits an oxygen atom, it looks green light.. And if you hit a nitrogen atom, you see some kind of blue, purple, pink light.. And normally, we see the green light in the Northern Lights.. And that's because it's actually easier to excite an oxygen atom to emit light.. It's a little harder to do that with a nitrogen atom.. So it only looks blue and purple if there's a lot of cargo particles that rain on Earth.. And I realized that we're dressed like the northern auroras.. So I'm like an oxygen atom.. In your beautiful green monkey. In my green monkey. And you're like a nitrogen atom on your purple top.. So this wasn't planned.. This wasn't planned.. But is it a case that you see more kind of green in the northern and purple lights in the southern light? Am I more of a kind of southern light girl? It depends basically on the amount of charge particles that come to Earth. So you're basically like a huge coronal mass ejection.. I've never seen a coronal mass ejection before.. I'm a small coronal mass ejection screen.. So a great complement, I don't know.. I'll take that one.. I'll hold on to him.. So Caroline, unfortunately, none of us have been able to see them.. But I'm going to ask our producers if we can recreate the northern auroras here in the studio.. Oh, fun.. So using the lights around the edge of the studio. Let's see what we can do.. Q, purple. Oh, so you're purple.. So you're actually pairing the nitrogen atoms on a northern light screen.. Very well done.. Thank you very much.. I feel like a northern light.. And let's see if we have green. Almost.. Almost.. Oh.. Does the northern light have any yellow? It could be slightly yellow. Yeah.. I mean, this yellow one looks pretty green, too.. It could be a yellowish green.. It could be a yellowish green.. And that's the closest I've ever been to the Northern Lights.. So I'm not complaining.. It's pretty sad, isn't it?. We're trying.. We're really trying.. Well, after that little adventure to see our own northern auroras, let's go back to the blue studio.. Tada. You say there's a lot of talk about the Northern auroras and Northern auroras in folklore that have been around for a long time.. Is he as old as life itself?. I mean, we would have had the Northern Lights before we had life itself.. So as long as the sun has been active, which has always been, and as long as the earth has had a magnetic field, we have had interactions between the two and we would have had the northern auroras.. So yes, humans have coexisted with them for so long, but it's only been in the last hundreds of years that we've understood what's going on.. And before we understood that, you know what some of the stories around them were?. I mean, it's different in different cultures.. Some people thought it was interactions between gods, arguments between gods, in some cultures it was used to predict the climate. And there might actually be some correlation there because, you know, actually the weather or not, you get a big screen might be related to what's going on in the atmosphere.. I'd love to see them, especially after hearing this from you.. And it seems that more and more people are being able to see them and take pictures of them.. Are they becoming more common and what's causing that?. So now we're in what's called a solar maximum, which basically means that the sun is in its greatest activity and the sun has an 11-year cycle.. So it's kind of now it's more active, so it's going to be less active and in another 11 years it's going to be more active again.. And that basically means there's more of these coronal mass ejections.. There are more types of large explosive events that emit charge particles. So that means there are more screens and you can see screens further away from the poles.. But there's also something else that I think is contributing to more people seeing them, which is if you compare something from now to 11 years ago, more people have smartphones.. We're more interconnected, you know, I'm in my local Facebook group, and if anyone sees the Northern Lights, everyone's gonna post and I'm gonna get off the couch and get out of my living room and I'm gonna go take a look and maybe be able to see them, which might not have happened 11 years ago or 11 years before. So I think our interconnection makes them easier to see in that sense and right now we're at the best time to see them.. So, you know, if you can act accordingly now because you have to wait another 11 years to get a good chance again. You said people are being able to see them from afar.. I read that people were watching the Northern Lights from as far south as the Caribbean.. Where are the best places in the world to see them? So ideally you want to be as close to the Arctic Circle as possible for the Northern Lights, obviously not for the Southern Lights. So places like Iceland are really good, Norway, Scotland can be good and if you want to see the lights of the south then ideally you want to be in Antarctica, obviously that's pretty hard. But big screens can be seen in South Africa, New Zealand, Tasmania. So yeah, how were the lights from the south? Is there so impressive? Yes, there may be just as impressive. I think the reason we hear about them a little less is that fewer people live on land around the South Pole.. So if you live in Antarctica you have a great chance to see them, but not many people live in Antarctica.. And then you really have to go pretty far to get to South Africa, to New Zealand, to Tasmania, while in the northern hemisphere, places like Iceland are really close to the Arctic Circle.. So there are more people who are in the place where you could see them.. Sounds like winter, well, winter for the northern hemisphere might be a better time to see them when it's a little darker.. There's also something like Christmas around the idea of the north pole and the northern aurora.. Is this the best time of year to go?. It's from November to March where, you know, yeah, it's winter, nights are longer, nights are darker.. If you can go somewhere so far north that they have polar winter, like in Svalbard where it's dark 24/7, you know, that makes it so much easier.. And for the Southern Hemisphere, it's the opposite of that.. So I think it's kind of from March to September, which is your winter.. That's when you get the best chance to see them.. And maybe you're in a place you want to go see the Northern Lights and you want to take a picture of them.. If you do, get some tips on how best to capture them from a 21-year-old photographer, Hugo Cordenand, from Finland. So much for those who are looking to capture the Northern Lights either on their phones or cameras, as larger cameras, I would be next.. So first of the phone users, so if you have a night mode on the phone, please consider using that because that's going to help you get as high-quality pictures and then what's going to both users is that they have a tripod.. This will allow you to have more exposure time, which will lead to better quality photographs because the more light there is in your, which enters the camera sensor, then the higher quality of the photograph will be. So use a tripod when possible.. That if you cannot adjust the configuration, please adjust the ISO and want the shutter speed and then the opening. The shutter speed often depends on the speed of the Northern Lights, so there is no setting that will always be applied, but between 8 seconds and 1.4 seconds it seems that they do quite well. So ISO, make sure, if you have a more modern camera, then don't be afraid to push the ISO because it doesn't matter if the cameras can handle ISO pretty well. And it can also be removed in post-production, as in the Northern Lights room and later in. So if there's some extra grain as a result in your photos. And then have as low as possible of a f-stop number in order to get as much light in the camera sensor. Once again, in order to have a better quality photograph. It's an experience I think everyone should experience at least once in their lives.. You want to forget that experience.. It's amazing.. And you lose track of Feltheim and stuff.. It's wonderful.. Is there any negative side effect of the northern aurora? All this magnetic field contamination or, you know, charge particles that are appearing around our atmosphere? Well, we're very lucky that Earth has a magnetic field because otherwise, you know, life wouldn't be possible.. This would be a real problem.. But even when they see the Northern Lights, the Sun's charge particles are interfering with our atmosphere.. They're kind of, I was still being protected even in a way by that screen.. They can be a little annoying that they can interfere with radio communication between GPS satellites and, for example, with the International Space Station and Earth, but, you know, nothing more than that.. They can cause, you know, in absolutely extreme cases, they can cause voltage surges.. So there was a big event in the mid-1800s where the sky was absolutely illuminated.. There were reports of people getting up and getting ready for work because they thought the sun had come up.. It was seen as south as the Caribbean. It was huge.. Back then, we weren't more or less, we weren't dependent on electricity the same way we were now.. But we had telegraphs and some of those broken, some people who used them electrocuted themselves and made some kind of sparks of fire.. So there was a little problem, but not like now.. So if we had one, if we had a coronal mass ejection of that size now, it could possibly interfere with the power grid, maybe it could interfere with our devices.. We have a little bit of a clue because in 1989 in Quebec and Canada, there was a big exhibition and it interfered with the power grid a little bit.. But it has basically never happened on a large scale.. So we don't really know what would happen.. We talk about space, it gives me this sense of perspective.. Yeah.. So in the world, like every little stress, it makes everything seem insignificant, doesn't it? It's like it's a little speck on a little planet that's being bombarded by particles from the sun.. It makes everything seem insignificant in comparison.. Now I'm just a little particle.. Exactly.. A small purple particle. Caroline, thank you so much for coming to the podcast.. Thanks for inviting me.. Thanks for joining us.. This is what in the world of the BBC World Service. I'm Hannah Galbot.. You can contact us at any time.. You can also send us your photos if you have seen the Lights of the North or the South yourself where on WhatsApp, we are on Instagram, of course we are here on YouTube and you can leave us a line in the comments below. See you next time.. Thank you.. Bye.