 What do most people not understand about the process of making a pop song now? I think everybody's got this allure of music. It really is pop music is moving into pop culture. It's crossing over. People are seeing behind the scenes, Instagram stories, relationships, tabloids, journalism, whether it's from TikTok or you know, the setters and journalists or YouTube channels doing reactions. But I think that the process of getting to the stage of this song is now live seems to have changed quite a lot. So what is it that people don't necessarily get about what that process looks like now? So I just made this video where I was talking about the people that are behind the scenes that help write the songs. And in many cases write the songs. And people have the impression that because somebody sings a song that they are the writer on it. Or if they have co-writers, that the co-writers are a minor part of this. But in reality, most pop songwriters, not all, but most have very little to do with their songs other than choosing them. They might come in and say, okay, I have an idea for a story of a song. They'll describe it. And then these professional songwriters will help them realize that idea. Or the people might have the song completely done and they come in hard to generalize. But does Taylor Swift write all of her lyrics? He probably writes most of her lyrics, I would think. But typically, it used to be that when you in the 1980s rock bands, there were very few people that were songwriters that worked with artists. Desmond Child was one. He worked with Bon Jovi, worked with Kiss, and he would co-write. He was a specialist that would write with rock bands. But it was very rare. Rock bands wrote their own songs. And a lot of pop artists wrote their own songs. But Madonna always had co-writers. This has been a thing since the 1950s people have had songwriters. They've had co-writers. The thing now about pop music is that you have to be your own promotion department, basically, to be really successful. So you have to be, you can't have to be an expert in social media. And I see people that one of the people is Tate McCrae is a huge pop star and she started on YouTube. She knows how to make her own videos. And she'll make 20, 30 TikToks for a song for a single. You can't beat that for advertising. And people that have that advantage, they can just put up their phone, they can lip sync, they do a dance, they can cut the stuff themselves on their phone and upload it. And you're a big pop star. If you can do that, that's a tremendous advantage. And this is how songs become hits. Because if you don't have a viral moment with a song, that's the days of the record labels creating your career are pretty much over. Yes, they can help, but it's very difficult if you don't have something that's on TikTok blowing up to have a successful single. Is there a problem with so many songwriters contributing to the end product? Is there an issue with that? I get the sense that maybe some people when the veil gets revealed and they understand that the sausages made go, hang on, 15 people wrote this cold play song. It's vocals and the guitar and program drums. Why, what was it fitted? There's Chris Martin. Then there's the other one. I think there's two more. Who the fucking, who are these 11 people in the room with them? Well, I always wonder that too. Like, who are these people? Coldplay, the first, to me, the first two cold play records are great records. Really, the second record to me is an absolutely brilliant record. As people get older, I've made videos about this that once people hit 30 or so artists, they begin to lose the spark, if you will. The Beatles broke up the year that Lenin and Ringo turned 30. Otherwise, Paul McCartney was 28 when they broke up, George Harrison was 27. These guys were young guys. They did 12 albums over the course of eight years. Some of the most important songs ever written and they weren't even 30. They literally broke up. Lenin turned 30 on November 9th, 1970 or already broken up by then. How much do you think that's due to the fact that they were 30 and how much of that do you think is due to the fact that they released 12 albums in the space of eight years? Because it seems to me that the pace of release, I know you've talked about this, is now slower, that people are producing an album every 18 months, something like that. Maybe if you're cranking and then two on it, once, twice come back running again. That would extend, you're talking about 20 year career off the back of the same pacing. How much of it do you think is, I don't know, some sort of wall that creatives hit at 30 and how much of it is, I've just exhausted my juice. I think both those things. One of the things, if you think about writing songs is like working out. The Beatles in 1965, they released the record, Rubber Soul, on August 6th, 1965. Then on December 3rd, they released help, I'm sorry, and then they released Rubber Soul on December 3rd, and they released Revolver on August 5th. In 364 days, they released three 14 song albums. They wrote, recorded, and released, and they toured three records in one calendar year. That's insane. And they had so many hit songs in it, but that's like working out. It's the more you work out, or it's nowadays, if you go most bands now, they do a record, they go out in tour for 18 months, they tour for two years, whatever, then you're out of shape writing. Because when you're on the road, most people don't like to write on the road. So what do you have to do? You come back, you put down a bunch of ideas, and those aren't very good. That's the starting to get back in shape again. It takes a couple of weeks to... How did the Beatles do it? The Beatles were just... Well, first of all, they were so famous that they couldn't do anything else. They were stuck in hotel rooms a lot, I guess. And they had incredible competition between Lenin McCartney, Andrew Harrison, to write better and better songs. Plus, they were competitive with bands like The Beach Boys as well. But Beatles are kind of a unique. Yeah. I didn't know talking about Usain Bolt's ability to run fast, something. So just explain, how would you identify a categorize the difference between a producer-driven song and an artist-driven song? Is there such a thing? Or is it just meritocracy and whatever song's best at the end of the day is what matters? Producer-driven songs are songs like... Would be something like, since you've been gone by Kelly Clarkson, that was Max Martin and Dr. Luke wrote this song. They wrote the song, they wrote the lyrics, they recorded everything. She came in and sang it, and that's a producer-driven song. Literally written by the two guys that produced it, including the lyrics. So most music nowadays, or a lot of music, is producer-driven. Whereas people come up with a track, whether it's country music, whether it's pop music, even rock music, there's some bed track first. Now, to be fair, historically, almost every songwriter writes the music first. They sing a melody, and then they write lyrics to the melody. Elton John being the exception. Bernie Copp top-end was Elton's lyricist. They co-wrote the stuff. Bernie would finish the lyrics, give him the Elton, Elton would sit at the piano, improvise the song, sing it, record it on a half inch or on a dat, and then they would cut the song. He would basically improvise it to the lyrics he had. I mean, this is very rare. I think in the Beatles' catalogue, from what I know, there was one song across the universe where John Lennon had the lyrics first. He's like the juice world of the pop era. Yeah, so this is... When I went to Nashville to do some songwriting, I told you I had a one-number-one song. The only country song I ever wrote. But then I went to Nashville, and if you have a number-one song, they put you in with all the A-list songwriters. So I went there, and I, in first probably three months in 2014, and I wrote with all the top songwriters in Nashville. So the first session I went in, and it was always three people, and I was like, why is it three people? Well, that's the way that we do it here. And I was like, why? Well, because we want to involve, you know, at the time, as many publishing companies as possible, different publishing companies. So I was signed to Sony ATV. There was a guy from... There'd be a writer from Warner Chappell, and maybe two writers from Warner Chappell, and you get in a room. I was a track guy. So I came in with my laptop, and I would have five tracks that I programmed drums. I played guitar. I played banjo. I played whatever on, and I had a full track. What do you think of this? That's interesting. What else you got? Play me a next song. Oh, I like that. I think I might have a chorus line. Everybody opens their laptops. What do you think of this? And then they're looking through, typing through. Oh, I get this line from someone else, and then they would have to be included in on the songwriting too, whatever. So that would be... That was in Nashville. But at that time period, that's when track guys started. The track guys are basically the producers that would come in, and and that would be a producer-driven song. And almost everything you hear on country radio now is producer-driven. In other news, this episode is brought to you by Momentous. If your workouts feel flat, your recovery slow, or you've just been feeling off, it might not be a training plan or diet, it might be something a bit more boring, like your testosterone. So if you're not performing in the gym, or the bedroom, the way that you want, or you just want to naturally improve your testosterone, Tonkata Lee is a fantastic research back place to start. And when this is stacked with zinc, it can make a huge improvement in testosterone production, strength, recovery, and energy, which is why I'm such a huge fan of Momentous's zinc. It supports testosterone, boosts vitality, and helps keep everything running like it should. And if you're still unsure, Momentous offers a 30-day money-back guarantee. So you can buy it and try it for 29 days. If you don't love it, don't give your money back. Plus, they ship internationally. Right now, you can get 35% of your first subscription and that 30-day money-back guarantee by going to the link in the description below, or heading to livemomentous.com-modern-wisdom, using the code modern-wisdom. Check out that's L-I-V-E-M-O-M-E-N-T-U-S. E-N-T-U-U-U-L-I-V-E-M-O-M-E-N-T-O-U-S.com-sash-modern-wisdom. And modern-wisdom. Check out. Thank you very much for tuning in. Did you enjoy that clip with the one and only Rick B. Arter? Well, fun like that episode is available right here. Go on, give it a watch.