 Hello, it's Hannah Gelbart here and welcome back to another episode of What in the World from the BBC World Service. Now, seeing the Northern Lights used to be in once-in-a-lifetime thing, the night sky lights up in pink and green and of course everyone rushes to capture it on their phones. And did you know there are also Southern Lights too? So today we want to find out what causes these beautiful colours, why people are seeing them more often and you're going to get tips from a photographer on how best to capture them. Here with me in the studio to talk this through is Caroline Steele, a BBC Science presenter. Hello, thank you for having me. So, have you ever seen the Northern Lights yourself? I wish I could say yes and I feel like I should be able to say yes because I'm such a fan but no, I haven't. I've tried so many times. So a few times this year I've driven to a field outside London and stood in the dark, looking up at the sky really excited because I've got friends messaging saying they can see them as far south as Brighton. But I've still not managed it. Have you seen them? I've also stood on my balcony on tiptoe. Actually I shouldn't say that because the balcony is quite dangerous. But I have stood on the balcony on my tiptoes looking out to see if I can catch a glimpse of them and it's always just been kind of rainy and cloudy where I am. But I have seen loads of photos of them. For people who don't know what they look like, can you describe what you might be seeing if you see them with your naked eye? They can look absolutely incredible. So if you imagine a photo, imagine most people have seen a photo of the Northern Lights, you sort of get ribbons of light through the sky. It can be green, it can be purple, it can be blue. And that's taken using a camera. It can look slightly different with the naked eye, not that I know first hand, but apparently they're slightly less bright because when you take a photo you basically leave the lens of the camera open for a little bit longer to capture a bit more light. But they do also move and flicker, which is something you can only really see in person and doesn't capture very well on camera. So yeah, they sound amazing. I could tell you the science about where they come from. Gold, yeah. That's it. OK, so they start, they actually start with the sun. So the sun is constantly emitting charge particles. It's sort of sending something we call solar wind towards Earth. So the Earth is constantly getting bombarded, kind of rained on by these charge particles. Luckily, the Earth has a magnetic field. And it kind of looks like if you imagine the Earth, it's like the Earth has got two ears, that's the magnetic field. And the magnetic field protects Earth from these charge particles. So normally, we don't notice that we're being rained on by the sun. But sometimes these things happen called coronal mass ejections, which is where there's essentially a sort of explosion on the sun's surface. And it sends out a ton of charge particles towards Earth. And the magnetic field gets a little bit overwhelmed and some charge particles can get in at the north and south pole. And when these charge particles collide with atoms in our atmosphere, that gives off light. And that's why we see these ribbons of light in the sky. What causes the different colours? Ah, so it depends on what kind of atom the charge particle is colliding with. So if it collides with an oxygen atom, you see green light. And if it collides with a nitrogen atom, you see kind of blue, purple, pink light. And normally, we see green light in the northern lights. And that's because it's actually kind of easier to excite an oxygen atom to make it give off light. It's a bit harder to do that with a nitrogen atom. So it only looks sort of blue and purple if there's a huge amount of charge particles kind of raining down on Earth. And I sort of noticed that we are dressed like the northern lights. So I'm like an oxygen atom. In your lovely green jumpsuit. In my green jumpsuit. And you're like a nitrogen atom in your purple top. So this was not planned. This was not planned. But is it a case that you see more kind of green in the northern lights and purple in the southern light? Am I more of a southern light kind of girl? It basically depends on the amount of charge particles that are coming towards Earth. So you're basically like a huge coronal mass ejection. I've never been seen a coronal mass ejection before. I'm a smaller coronal mass ejection display. So a great complement, I don't know. I'll take that one. I'll hold onto it. So Caroline, sadly, neither of us have ever managed to see them. But I'm going to ask our producers if we can recreate the northern lights here in the studio. Oh, fun. So using the lights around the edge of the studio. Let's see what we can do. Q, purple. Oh, so you're purple. So you're actually matching the nitrogen atoms in a northern light display. So well done. Thank you very much. I feel like a northern light. And let's see if we've got green. Nearly. Nearly. Oh. Does the northern light have any yellow? It could be slightly yellow. Yeah. I mean, this also this yellow looks quite green. It could be a yellowy green. It could be a yellowy green. And that's the closest I've ever been to northern lights. So I'm not complaining. It's quite sad, isn't it, really? Yeah. We're trying. We're really trying. Well, after that little adventure to see our very own northern lights, let's go back to the studio blue. Tada. You say that there's loads of talk of the northern lights and the southern lights in folklore that they've been around for a long time. Is it, you know, as old as life itself? Yes. I mean, we would have had the northern lights before we had life itself. So as long as the sun has been active, which it has always been, and as long as the earth has had a magnetic field, we will have had interactions between the two and we would have had the northern lights. So yeah, humans have coexisted alongside them such a long time, but it's only been in the last couple of hundred years that we've sort of understood what's going on. And before we understood that, do you know what some of the stories were around them? Yeah. I mean, it's different in different cultures. Some people thought it was interactions between gods, arguments between gods, in some cultures it was used to predict the weather. And actually there might be some correlation there because, you know, actually weather or not, you get a big display can be related to what's going on in the atmosphere. I would really love to see them, especially after hearing this from you. And it just seems that more and more people are being able to see them and take photos of them. Are they becoming more common and what's causing that? So it's kind of two parts to that. So right now we're in what's called a solar maximum, which basically means the sun is at its most active and the sun has an 11 year cycle. So it's sort of right now it's more active, then it's going to become less active and in another 11 years it will be more active again. And that basically means there are more of these coronal mass ejections. There are more kind of big explosive events that emit charge particles. So that means that there are more displays and you can see displays further away from the poles. But there's also something else which I think is kind of contributing to more people seeing them, which is if you compare sort of now to 11 years ago, more people have smartphones. We're more interconnected, you know, I'm on my local Facebook group and if anyone sees the Northern Lights, everyone will be posting and I will get off the sofa and leave my living room and go and have a look and maybe be able to see them, which might not have happened 11 years ago or the 11 years before that. So I think our interconnectedness sort of makes them easier to see in that sense and we right now are at the best time to be seeing them. So, you know, if you can act on it now because you have to wait another 11 years to have a good chance again. You said that people are being able to see them from further away. I read that people were seeing the Northern Lights from as far south as the Caribbean. Where are the best places in the world to see them? So ideally you want to kind of be as near to the Arctic Circle as possible for the Northern Lights, obviously not for the Southern Lights. So places like Iceland are really good, Norway, Scotland can be good and if you want to see the Southern Lights then ideally you want to be in Antarctica, obviously that's quite hard. But big displays can be seen in South Africa, New Zealand, Tasmania. So yeah, what did the Southern Lights look like? Are there as impressive? Yeah, there can be just as impressive. I think the reason why we sort of hear about them a bit less is fewer people live on land around the South Pole. So if you live in Antarctica you have a great chance of seeing them but not many people live in Antarctica. And then you actually have to go quite far to get to South Africa, to New Zealand, to Tasmania, whereas in the Northern Hemisphere, places like Iceland are really near the Arctic Circle. So there's just more people that are kind of in the place where you could see them. It sounds like winter, well, the winter for the Northern Hemisphere might be a better time to see them when it's a bit darker. Plus there's also something quite like Christmasy around the idea of the Northern pole and the Northern Lights. Is that the best time of year to go? Yeah. It's November through to March where, you know, yeah, it's winter, the nights are longer, the nights are darker. If you can go somewhere so far north that they have polar winter, like in Svalbard where it's dark 24-7, you know, that makes it so much easier. And then for the Southern Hemisphere, it's the opposite of that. So I think it's something like March through September, which is their winter. That's when you stand the best chance of seeing them. And maybe you are in a place that you want to go and see the Northern Lights and you want to take a photo of them. If you do, hear us some tips on how best to capture them from a photographer, Hugo Cordenand who is 21 and from Finland. So much was for those who are looking to capture the Northern Lights either on their phones or the cameras, like bigger cameras, I would be the following. So first of phone users, so if you do have a night mode on your phone, please consider using that because that's going to help you get as high quality photographs and then what goes to both users is that they have a tripod. This is going to allow you to have longer exposure times, which is going to lead to also better quality photographs because the more light there is in your, that gets into camera sensor, then the higher quality the photograph will be. So use a tripod when possible. That if you cannot adjust the settings, then please do adjust the ISO and want the shutter speed and then the aperture. The shutter speed often does depend on the speed of the Northern Lights, so there's not the setting that's always going to apply, but between 8 seconds and 1.4 seconds seems to do pretty well. Then ISO, make sure to, if you have a more modern camera, then don't be afraid to push the ISO up because no matter if the cameras can handle ISO pretty well. And you can also remove it in post-production, such as in the Northern Lights room and later on. Then if there's some extra grain as a result in your photos. And then have as low as possible of an f-stop number in order to get as much light into the camera sensor. Again, in order to have a better quality photograph. It is an experience that I believe everyone should experience at least once in their lives. You want to forget that experience. It is amazing. And you lose the track of Feltheim and stuff. It is wonderful. Are there any negative side effects of the Northern Lights? Are all of this magnetic field pollution or, you know, charge particles being popped around our atmosphere? Well, we're really lucky that the Earth has a magnetic field because if it didn't, you know, life wouldn't be possible. This would be a real problem. But even when you see the Northern Lights, the charge particles from the Sun are interfering with our atmosphere. They're kind of, it was still being protected even in a way by that display. They can be a bit of a pain in that they can interfere with radio communication between GPS satellites and, with, say, the International Space Station and Earth, but, you know, nothing to major. They can cause, you know, in absolutely extreme cases, they can cause power surges. So there was this huge event in the mid-1800s where the skies absolutely lit up. There were reports of people getting up and getting ready for work because they thought the sun had risen. It was seen as far south as the Caribbean. It was huge. Back then, we didn't sort of, we weren't dependent on electricity in the same way as we are now. But we did have telegraph machines and some of those broke, some people who were using them got electrocuted and they did sort of fire sparks. So there was a bit of a problem, but not kind of like it is now. So if we had a, if we had a coronal mass ejection of that size now, it could feasibly interfere with the power grid, it could maybe interfere with our devices. We have a bit of a clue because in 1989 in Quebec and Canada, there was a huge display and that did interfere with the power grid a bit. But it's basically never happened on a huge scale. So we don't really know what would happen. We talk about space, it gives me this sense of perspective. Yeah. So in the world, like every single bit of stress, it makes everything seem insignificant, right? It's like I'm a tiny speck on a tiny planet that's being bombarded by particles from the sun. It just makes everything seem unimportant in comparison. Now I'm just a little particle. Exactly. A little purple particle. Caroline, thank you so much for coming on the podcast. Thank you for having me. Thank you for joining us. This is What in the World from the BBC World Service. I'm Hannah Galbot. You can get in touch with us anytime. You can also send us your photos if you have seen the Northern or Southern Lights yourself where on WhatsApp, we're on Instagram, we are of course here on YouTube and you can drop us a line in the comments below. We'll see you next time. Thanks. Bye.