Welcome back to Getting Up to Speed in Biology. You've already had a lot of basic information that should be preparing you to take introductory biology at MIT or anywhere else.. You should have completed your first set of problems in addition to all the class exercises we've given you.. So you're on very good ground now to move on to the last two conference units.. Today's lecture, today's class, is going to be about how changes in DNA, changes in genes, govern the outcome for the organism.. Let's talk about mutations, let's talk alleles, let's talk pedigree, and if you don't know what those words mean, you're in the right place.. Here are our topics for today. Well, first of all, talk about mutations.. Let's talk about something, I'm gonna call it allele segregation.. We'll talk about genetics and genetic crosses.. And finally we'll talk about pedigree.. Today's general theme is how does a DNA sequence connect to a trait? A trait is something you can see, an observable feature, the color of the eyes, the color of your hair, for example, also called phenotype. The DNA sequence can alter the protein that is produced, the amount or type of protein, and can change all sorts of things, including whether a dog is large or small, or whether an insect has normal parts of the mouth or has legs growing from its head.. Let's start with mutations.. Let me start by reminding you of what we talked about last time, the information flows from DNA to protein to a trait.. DNA, the gene is transcribed into RNA, which then translates into protein.. This is the flow of information we talked about yesterday.. That protein then has a function that can give an observable characteristic, which we call a trait.. Let's write that down.. A trait is something you can see, an observable characteristic, and the scientific term for that is phenotype.. If you change the DNA, you can change the RNA, and you can change the protein, and you can change the trait.. These DNA changes occur at the base, so DNA-based sequence changes are called mutations, and they're relative to something else, whether you have a mutated gene or not.. More generally we think of genes that have different sequence variants.. We'll get to that in a moment.. But mutations can alter the protein sequence, and they can alter the protein function, and so they can change a trait.. That's your general notion of mutations.. There are really two classes I want you to know about. Two types of mutation. The first are point mutations.. These change one base at a time.. They change a base, and replace another base in the same position in the DNA sequence.. The second type I want you to know is insertions and eliminations.. Insertions add one or more bases, and deletions remove one or more bases. There are also other kinds of mutations that affect more than the protein coding sequence, and we will talk about those very briefly in a moment.. But let's see some slides here so we can get the feeling of how we can change the protein sequence by changing the DNA.. I showed you here on this slide a piece of double-chained DNA.. You see all the polarity you know now, and the base pairing.. The lower strand that I have designated as template strand, and I have shown you the messenger RNA that is transcribed using that lower strand as template. So I showed you the protein that translates from the codons of that messenger RNA.. I've designated this wild-type gene.. It's a point of reference.. type of cod sometimes people use the normal term, but that's not correct. It's usually the most common version of that gene.. Okay, let's see what happens now if we change that gene.. So at the top, again, I got what I had on the previous slide, the wild gene type and protein.. And now we've made a point mutation where we've changed a single base in DNA.. Okay, we've changed. It's underlined in pink.. We changed it for what instead of reading what it was?. Now you read GGT. You can see it at the same time as me.. So we've changed there an A to a T and in the other thread that also rotates the base, it changes from a T to an A.. The messenger RNA is now changed because the template for the messenger RNA has changed. And when that messenger RNA translates into protein, you can see that there is now a different amino acid in the protein chain.. There's a valine instead of an asparagina, okay, or a potassium acid.. Valine instead of asphotic acid. Okay, so the protein sequence, the actual amino acid sequence in the protein has changed.. This type of mutation is a point mutation, as I said, and it's called a wrong-sense mutation.. You have a protein, but it's a little different.. There's another type where, again, you make a base change in DNA, it's underlined.. And then if you start your translation of the RNA protein that is made using this new template now, you see that immediately after the first amino acid, methionine, there is a codon stop that stops the translation.. And the protein is not made at all except for the first amino acid.. This is called meaningless mutation and truncates or prematurely stops the protein. And obviously you wouldn't have a functional protein here.. In the case of poor sense protein, it could be functional, but it could have a slightly different function than the initial one.. Here's another example of a point mutation and this is going to be a silent mutation.. In this case, there is again a base replacement for the DNA template to change.. But now, if you make the messenger RNA conceptually and the protein, you see that the protein sequence of the mutated gene is the same as the parent gene.. And that's because more than one codon can encode the same amino acid we saw before when we looked at the genetic code.. So even though DNA has changed, the protein hasn't changed and this is called a silent mutation.. Here is an example of an insertion. The arrow indicates where a base has been inserted into the DNA that wasn't there and this does something deep to the protein.. Change something called a reading frame. You remember that the protein starts with ATG, AUG as the RNA codon and corresponds to the methionine and then you read the RNA without spaces.. We've explored that in the previous class. You read three times three right next to each other and that sets the reading frame. It tells you how the protein elbows will look one after another.. If you add anything other than a three-base multiple, you change the reading frame.. Here I put in one, an extra base and look at what happens with the protein coding sequence.. Now you see you start the same thing, methionine, tryptophan, but now instead of having seen the aspartic proline acid, now you have three and in proline lysine and so on.. You have changed the reading frame and protein that is made of this particular gene and that could profoundly change the function of the protein. I could make it useless.. Sometimes I could give her a new function.. It could give you a function that causes disease.. This is the insertion by changing the reading frame and the same idea is true for an elimination by changing the reading frame. The last thing I'm going to indicate here on the board is that mutations can change the protein coding sequence, but they can also change the sequence of what I'm going to call control regions.. DNA control, let's call it, where DNA control is really dictating whether or not the RNA is done in the first place.. We don't really discuss this at all when we talk about transcription, but I'm planting this notion in your mind now, so you've heard of it.. This DNA control that regulates RNA synthesis, transcription, and this can change the amount of RNA and the amount of protein made. Good.. Now you're able to go to task one, exercise class one, and practice your protein coding skills and figure out what happens when you do multiple mutations in DNA to the protein you do.