Welcome to explore computing. Today's video is computer networks, Internet protocols. So as I mentioned at the last conference, protocols on the Internet are in layers.. And this is sometimes a little hard to understand, but it's important to understand how the Internet really works.. I like to teach layered protocols by analogy. So let's start with a little hypothetical here.. Suppose after I finish teaching at Stanford, I retire and move to Maine. And I've always been a good job with my hands.. I used to build models and so I decide I'm gonna go build some wooden toys.. And wooden toys end up being very popular.. And so people around the world ask if they can buy my toys.. Someone from Stanford, a former California student wants to buy one of my toys.. Well, here's a chance.. I hire a truck and my truck takes the toy to a train station.. And we moved the toy to the train station.. And the train goes to Chicago and then transfers to another train.. And that ends somewhere in Los Angeles.. And then I hired another truck to take the Los Angeles toy wherever my ex-student lives.. So this will take the toy to my ex-student assuming I can handle the complexities of running an entire transport network.. But this doesn't seem like a very good idea.. He does.. I don't want to do this.. I want to focus on building toys.. I don't want to do the transport stuff.. What I'd like to do is take the toy and drop it off at FedEx's office and make it magically appear in my old student home.. Now, all the steps I've tried to go through before like hiring trucks, working on train schedules, sewing trucks with gasoline, which all still happens.. But the difference is, I'm not dealing with that.. FedEx is. And so the same kind of process happens when we're developing software for the Internet.. Ultimately, there are people who work on that lower layer, on the layer where someone is trying to figure out how to fill the trucks or make train schedules.. But most programmers, programming applications on the Internet don't deal with that level of complexity.. Instead, they do the equivalent of leaving some information in FedEx's office and making it magically appear at the other end.. So what we're going to do is we're going to take a look at what sometimes refers to the Internet protocol stack.. And let's take it from the bottom layer that fills the truck with the gas layer where the rubber actually gets to the road.. And let's see the different layers that are built up at the top until you get to the top layer, which is where the applications occur, where they do the equivalent of dropping the information in FedEx and magically appears at the other end.. All right, so this is the Internet protocol stack.. So in the bottom layer, we have the physical layer, and that's basically the layer where we're filling the truck with gasoline.. And then we have a number of layers on top of that.. And then in the top layer, we have the application layer.. And that's the layer where people are leaving packets on FedEx.. So let's take a look at each of these layers and see how they work.. The first layer, the lower layer is the physical layer.. When we're working on the physical layer, we have to decide exactly how we're transmitting the information to use zeros and zeros.. So, for example, when we're transferring information over the phone, are we going to have a 10-hz 70 ton hertz or are we going to have a 2025 ton hertz?. We need to figure out how everything's gonna fit in.. Now, what happens with the physical layer is that any time you come up with a new network, you're going to have to define a new physical layer.. And we're going to find that this isn't the case with all the layers, but the lower layers we need to define a new copy of each time we have a new type of network.. So if I decide that the best way to get information across the Pacific is to have a bunch of sharks with frickin laser rays in their heads, I need to figure out how those sharks are going to transmit zeros and ones through the Pacific.. Above the physical layers in the network layer, the protocol in the network layer is the Internet protocol. This is the same Internet protocol we saw when we saw IP addresses.. While this layer is built on top of the physical layer, it is still quite primitive. All information sent with the Internet protocol will be limited to packages of 64 kilobytes. And these packages will include the sender's IP address, the recipient's IP address, a check sum, which is a means of trying to determine if something accidentally got into some of the bits in the package, and then the actual data.. One of the things that particularly makes this network layer a little annoying to work with is that there is no guarantee of delivery. The Internet protocol layer says it will make the appointment a better effort and appointment to take the package to destination. And one of the questions is, why do we have this really primitive layer? And the answer is because again, whenever we have a new type of network that we want to define, we need to define the physical layer and we need to define the network layer.. So coming back to my sharks with a damn laser beam example, I need those sharks somehow lined up to get packages from one side of the Pacific to the other side.. I don't want to deal with a more complex protocol.. I want the simplest protocol possible because I'm having enough trouble trying to align these sharks.. Because the network layer is relatively simple, it's going to be relatively easy for someone to come with a new type of network and implement the network layer into that new type of network.. By raising a layer, we have the transport layer.. There are actually several protocols that work on this layer, but by far the most famous is the transmission control protocol or TCP.. The TCP protocol basically acts like our FedEx does, what we're going to be able to do with the transmission control protocol is that it's going to be able to at the top of the network layer and, ultimately, at the top of the physical layer.. And we're going to be able to leave the packets in the transmission layer and magically appear on the other side.. TCP and IP are often considered the key protocols of the Internet, the most important protocols of the Internet. Let's take a look at how these two work together to do their job.. So what we have here is a video of the Lord of the Rings, the Community of the Ring.. It's 2.53 gigabytes and that means I made this little interactive video before I had HDTVs in widespread use.. So at 2.53 gigabytes, this movie is too big to fit into our 64 individual kill bite packs.. So if we want to send this movie what has to happen is that it needs to be divided into all these little packages and this is something that TCP is going to do for us.. So as someone who's building on top of TCP, I hand over the film to TCP.. TCP breaks the film with all these small individual packages and if you solve it, there are more than 6,000 or 63,000 packages for the entire film. What TCP is going to do is it's going to number each of the individual packets and it's going to mark the packets with the IP number, the source computer and the IP number, the target team.. Then you're going to start sending the packages over the Internet using the Internet protocol. As mentioned above, the internet protocol does not guarantee the transfer. He's just doing a better job.. Among other things, this means that some packages will be lost and some packages will arrive in the wrong order.. Now what TCP is going to do is keep track of the different packages.. If the packages arrive in the wrong order, you will reorder them to the right order and even more pleasant, you will keep a record of the total number of packages and if some of the packages are missing, you will send a request using IP back to the original computer saying, hey, that package did not appear, you can send me another copy and then that copy will be sent back. From the point of view of someone who's using TCP, all this is completely hidden.. As far as the TCP user is concerned, we only have a direct connection from one computer to the other computer.. We can shovel any information we want in this connection and it will magically appear on the other side.. Finally, it takes us to our last layer, the application layer. This is a layer where all the things that matter to you happen.. So we have a lot of mail protocols, SMTP, pop, IMAP, protocol for the web, HTTP is here.. There are file transfer protocols like FTP and FTP secure and basically every program that is on the network that does anything needs to have some kind of protocol. They may be well-specified protocols that are available to the public and that different programs may interoperate with or may be completely proprietary. But ultimately, as we've seen before, if two computers are on the net and they're operating together, there has to be some kind of formal agreement between those two computers and that formal agreement is a protocol.. But as we have seen, the application layer is built on top of the other layers. So if you come up with a great cool new idea for a new type of application on the Internet, you don't have to go back and say, hey, I have to figure out how to move those packages around.. I need to know how to reorder those packages.. That's completely handled for you by TCP.. You're just gonna handle things to TCP and TCP will take care of that.. You don't have to worry, hey, am I running over a Wi-Fi network? Am I running over a fiber optic cable? Am I running over Patrick Sharks with the Frick and LaserBeams network?. So you can see that this layered protocol really provides some great advantages to people in the upper layers.. There are some other useful implications of the fact that everything below is handled by packages.. Consider, for example, that I am sitting in my bedroom and I am trying to unload the load from the rings. Now, it turns out that all the Internet traffic from our particular apartment travels through the same wires to the wider Internet for the university. And so without packages, while I'm unloading the rings, no one else can do anything.. But because the traffic is divided into packages, what's going to happen is that I'm going to get my little 64 kilobyte package from the load of the rings.. Maybe my friend next door is watching the movie.. You'll get your 64 kilobyte package from above.. I'll get a package of the ring load.. Maybe someone's actually trying to get some work done.. They'll receive an email.. And basically the packages will get everyone to share the same cable.. And some packages will come for me.. Some packages will come for someone else.. People will be able to get work between our packages. And again, if we sent everything in one big piece, maybe you'd get the same amount of traffic, but everyone would have to sit and wait for that big piece to come through.. So the fact that things are divided into packages is really pretty big.. Another situation in which packages work very well is when they are used for communication purposes. So if you look at telecommunications, you will discover that there are two different ways of telecommunications can happen.. You can have what is called circuit switching, which is traditionally how telecommunications have happened, or you can have packet switching and actually everything is moving to packet switching.. You may have noticed that phones in Stanford are often Cisco phones. You might think, I thought Cisco was a networking company.. I didn't think they were a phone company.. Well, we're using Cisco phones because Cisco phones use Internet package technology.. And it turns out that Internet package technology is much more efficient than traditional phones.. So let's take a look at how this really works.. So I've mentioned my friend Tammy several times.. And he moved to Italy a long time ago.. So we talked on the phone and using traditional circuit switching technology.. The thing is, when I'm on the phone with Tammy, there's a dedicated line between Stanford and Italy.. And so it may not be a single line.. And it's actually a series of lines that go through different switching stations.. But ultimately, all the way, there's a specific wire while I'm on the phone with her completely dedicated to both of us.. And if we're talking, it's going great.. We're using our cable.. And if we're angry with each other and we don't say much, well, those lines are still completely dedicated to us, even though we're not saying anything.. So this isn't necessarily the most efficient use of these cables or these cables that are connecting Stanford to Italy.. Now, you may have noticed that most of the calls that some of you have been making to friends abroad is actually completely free. Maybe you're using something like FaceTime or Google Hangouts or something.. These technologies use Internet packages. And what's going on in those situations is that instead of having a completely dedicated circuit between you and saying that your friend and the Bing program abroad in South Africa, what's going on is that your voice is being cut into these small packages of 64 kilobytes.. These packages are being introduced into the network along with the packages of all the others.. And your packages are going to get to the other end.. And because the lines are now shared, it's not as expensive as when the lines were dedicated and to be perfectly honest, the phone system between here and Italy wasn't so big that having a dedicated line necessarily led to great results anyway.. So, you know, maybe FaceTime for the best, although I haven't had such great experiences using Skype for people in South Africa.. So, you know, a lot depends on how the Internet connection goes.. And that really brings another interesting point about how the whole package situation works because the packages are being shared on the line with everything else.. Sometimes packages are bottled along with the rest of the Internet traffic. And so, what's going on is at the other end, you're getting a package and you have to decide, wow, I'm missing this package.. But if I wait too long before playing the video, my user is going to think this is getting a little weird.. So, maybe I should go ahead and play the video before the package arrives and we're gonna have a technical glitch.. So, there are all kinds of interesting situations that kind of curve because this information is being sent in packages. All right, that's all for our study of the Internet and Internet protocols.. We're going to move on to next week because we're going to start looking at the World Wide Web and we're going to start learning how to make web pages.. I'll talk to you soon.. Have a great weekend.