I'm Paolo Zurico and I'm a professor of economics at the London Business School.. Together with my colleague and my regularity, we have developed a series of mini-reading as a COVID-19 user guide. Today, I will present the first part about GALPAR in fact. Let me describe what we are going to do and what we are going to learn from this conference.. We're going to present some basic evidence about the pandemic, and we're going to identify some pattern in the existing research data available out there that might have been overlooked.. Let's discuss what drives a country's capacity in the system. After this conference, we will be able to understand the demographic composition of the career and critical patients. You will be able to use comparisons of contrast countries to be able to evaluate pros and cons that the different health policy strategies that have been adopted by different countries around the world. In addition, you will be able to measure and identify a country's capacity in the system and what kind of policy can expand it. Let me begin by briefly summarizing the evidence that for now it is sadly not.. In this graph, as a vertical axis, the number of cases infected according to the number of days that have passed since case number 100 was declared. Always as a country has been standardized to zero so that it can make a comparison across the country. There's something very clear about this curve.. He says the number of cases tends to increase exponentially and to all countries sooner or later tend to catch up with China.. However, there are some notable exceptions. South Korea, Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong. Why is the country different? Why, after the same number of days, the data and to have developed far fewer infected cases than the other country? Can we learn anything from your health policy strategy? For example, South Korea has used a huge testing program. Japan, there are strong social norms and great obedience of the people to the government in the country. In Singapore and Hong Kong, the policy of repression in particular is an extensive practice.. Another way to look at the evidence is instead of looking at the empirical contagion curve to see the empirical mortality curve.. On the vertical axis of this graph, you can see the number of deaths depending on the number of days since that number declared. Once again, we can see a clear curve with countries catching up and in the case of Italy, it really overcame China. Once again, South Korea is an atypical. After the same number of days since death was declared number 10, South Korea has a fraction of the number of deaths in Italy. Why? What can we learn from the experience of the other country?. In this chart, you see for each age group of the population, what is the proportion of infected in that age group? South Korea is the correct bar, while Italy is represented by the green bar. A marked difference emerged from this comparison.. If you look at the Korean data, it will look like most of the infected are young. In fact, in 20-year-olds, up to 30 per cent of those infected are infected, but 70-year-olds and 80-year-olds are only 6 or 3 per cent.. On the other hand, Italy has very few people infected among young people and among the elderly, the proportion reaches 20% among people aged 60, 70 and of the race.. Why? What data are we going to rely on? Together, some information on this is very useful to examine the health policy strategy adopted by the two countries.. South Korea is essentially testing everyone, not literally, but using a statistical procedure that is called random testing, using a representative sample of the population, which has been tested and therefore we can be sure that samples are taken uniformly for different age groups.. Italy, on the other hand, has chosen a policy in which they only taught this symptomatic test and typically the worst and critical that went to the hospital. So the sample of Italy is usually biased towards people who actually develop symptoms.. But looking at South Korea it is suggested that, in fact, there is much more asymptomatic than symptomatic, suggesting that the number of cases infected is probably much higher than we know.. Of course, you might think South Korea, especially something scientists call external validity.. However, there is something we can learn from other countries, then something we can learn from another experience.. This is what scientists call a case-in-natural experiment, which occurred in the city of Vaux in Vellato. In that city, a large part of the population took lives. It is true that Italy had a policy that only infected people should be analyzed, but it happened that in the city of Vaux, the majority of the population is infected.. So the city of Vaux is a representative sample of the population in the city of Vaux, simply because most people became infected.. And within the sample of the city of Vaux it is very clear that most of the infected are among the young. So now we can be more confident and affirm that COVID-19, in fact, young people, much more than they do with old people, is that young people are much more likely to be asymptomatic.. It is true, however, that the COVID-19 makes much more death among the elderly. What is seen in this graph by age group is the so-called mortality rate, which is the relationship between the number of deaths and the number of cases. Note that there is great uncertainty about this proportion. We can only be sure of the number of deaths, but the number of cases is unknown, because in most parts of the world, with the exception of South Korea, only symptomatic cases can prove it.. This implies that the number of cases everywhere, except South Korea, is much higher than what the government actually recorded.. In fact, South Korea has a mortality rate, which is below 1%, 3% of China, the surprising and unbelievable 7% of Italy, which is probably an artifact of the fact that in Italy only symptomatic has been tested so far. The number is probably much closer.. The real number is more likely to be closer to South Korea and China, suggesting that in Italy, unfortunately there are many more infected cases than the Italian government believes. Something, however, that is quite consistent across the country is that the proportion of people who die tends to be in the oldest group. So it must be true that older, that COVID-19 tends to kill older. However, there seem to be dramatic differences between the old part of Italy, in relation to the Chinese and the people of South Korea.. To appreciate whether this difference is true or is a statistical artifact, we can look at another piece of evidence, the demographic pyramid.. This calculation is a measure, the proportion of the population in each age group among men and women.. For example, if you are a Chinese man and are between 13 and 34 years old, you will be represented 4.6% of the total Chinese population. And if you are a woman in the same age group, you will be represented 4.3 of the Chinese population. What is clear when comparing the pyramid of China with that of Italy is that China has a large part of factor down here.. This implies that there are many younger people as part of the relationship than Iranian Italy. In fact, for practically every one of these groups, once women's men meet, 2 per cent more than the proportion of the population in the same age group in China than in Italy. Of course, if a lower part is larger, it tends to be the case that the upper part is thinner. If you compare, for example, 70-year-olds and some women and men, what you get is that you have a part of the population that is more than 2% greater than the same part of the Chinese population.. In other words, Italy has a much higher proportion of the population among the elderly than China.. But we have said in the previous slide that COVID-19 kills more older people than young people, but if Italy has a higher proportion of the population among the old, this must imply that the mortality rate must be higher for Italy than for China, and that is exactly what we observe.. Why do we attach so much importance to a number of cases? This is the contagion curve that everyone is talking about and that by now you will probably be familiar with. The red curve represents the number of cases of infection depending on the time since the first case develops. Without any political intervention, what is happening is that the curve is flat, but then as if the first people infected them, this tends to infect another person, another there are two people who can infect another two people, and now those four people can infect another four people, and this multiplies in a way that makes the curve grow exponentially.. But as the curve grows exponentially, there comes a point where many people have become infected, and if they don't recover, they also get immunity.. This means that the new infection can't affect everyone else because people already have immunity, and so we go through the infection curve.. The problem is that the health system has a capacity, which is represented here as the horizontal grey line.. Every time we're above the capacity of the health system, it means that there are more critical patients than beds in intensive care units available.. This is a large fraction of those people could die as a result of the lack of an intensive care unit.. Being economists, we're used to thinking like a supplier demand.. You can think of the red contagion curve as the demand for health care, and you can think of the horizontal line, the gray line as the supply for health care. What is the problem with the red curve? Cases of infected people are so concentrated in a short period of time that it far exceeds the capacity of the health system. So what the government is trying to do is try to stop the spread of the disease in a way that the number of cases can spread.. The area under the blue curve is not necessarily smaller and it is not even possibly desirable that it be smaller than the red curve. However, cases spread over time in a way that the health system can cope with and demand and supply can mean. While without any intervention, there is an excess of demand that the government needs to find a way to resolve. The big question is how to achieve this more effectively. There is consensus on the desirability of flattening the curve. There is less consensus on how to achieve. A first step in understanding what the government could do is to see how much intensive care capacity can expand.. In the next video, second part, epidemiology for donors, let's talk about how to reduce the rate of contagion. Let's start with capacity expansion.. First, we will appreciate how we can identify a measure with these and the capacity of the health system in each country.. In this chart, you see for many university countries what is the number of critical beds per 100,000 people. Germany has 29 beds per 100,000 cities. Portugal has only four. Italy is approximately the average with a number close to 12.5. When we talk about the capacity of the system, we are talking not only about the number of beds, but also about the number of equipment, with for COVID-19, it is mainly about fans.. Being a disease that brings respiratory complications. So it should not come as a surprise that in an effort to expand fan capacity, Italy has asked its only manufacturer to quadruple the fan supply. Germany has ordered 10,000 more and Matt Hancock UK Health Secretary have declared, if you produce a fan, we will buy. No number is for our. There is also geographical heterogeneity in the capacity of the health system. In this table, we report the proportion of intensive care unit used for the patient COVID-19. Just to give you an understanding of how the intensive care unit works, usually, or at every point of time during the year, 70% of those beds are occupied with people with other illnesses.. Car accident, stroke, critical care due to normal seasonal flu is only 30% of the bed on average, which are actually free, which are actually plenty to be used in other emergencies. This is what you see in this graph as the horizontal drainage line.. As you can see, in terms of how patient COVID-19 is already well above its capacity.. People must be sitting in rooms in the hallway. They must have just been taken away from the hospital.. And the situation does not look better in the market, remote, over the host of the Guri. It's all in the south that still seems to have reserve capacity.. In general, as a country, Italy seems to be already quite stretched. However, there is good news.. In the short term, the provision of health services can be expanded.. This is the case of the wooden jacket between February 25 and March 16. The number of cases of coronavirus increased, but we did the proportion of patients who were treated by colonizers increased.. And in particular, the wood jacket region was able to expand by going from as low as 700 at the beginning of the sample. And in a matter of a few days, less to get there.. So from March 5 to March 16, in 10 days, men have to move from 700 places to 1200 places and increase from 500 intensive care units. So what the government can do can start using beds that are in the private sector, in the private health sector, and pay the private health sector to expand this capacity.. You can start using hotels, you can start using barracks, you can start using even school and classroom as an intensive care unit. But you don't need only beds, you also need fans. Therefore, you need to turn to your manufacturing industry and order to produce more fan and any firm manufacturer to become the production of components that together can be assembled to new KSI fan. However, it is not just a matter of physical capital. Capacity-building also means expanding human capital capacity. There won't be enough nurses, there won't be any doctors.. So one option the government has is to call all the nurses and doctors who are retired.. You can even go further and try to start training for a very basic task associated with the fan, police officers and school teachers. And ask the army to come in and do the duty of police officer. Not only, but if the cases are originally concentrated as the case of Lombardy, a good idea is to bring critical care not related to the disease, critical patient in other regions that still has a spare capacity to release a little pressure on the region at the facility. So what we've learned in this first part is that the pact is the value of the health crisis of our time.. Young people are much more likely to be infected. They're the carrier and they're typically symptomatic.. But old people are more likely to die.. Many countries face heavy demand for health care. There are too many critical patients, not just about coatine, for very few beds and fan in the intensive care unit.. This poses a threat challenge, not only for infected patients, but also for regular critical patients for any other reason that they are now much more likely to die or wait longer for critical care they need. Expanding a health care supply takes time at the hotel, but acts as an impossible school in the intensive care unit, but also asking the manufacturing industry to become a manufacturer of fan components. However, it is not enough to expand physical capital capacity, it is also necessary to expand human capital capacity. Remember the retired nurse in the staff, train the volunteer police officers, where the atmosphere is carried out, duty of politics. This is all that means to this part one over gathered in fact. The next part concerns the epidemiology of donors. Thank you very much.